---
# Title, summary, and other stuff.
linktitle: FAIR-ify
summary: 'Learn how to FAIR-ify your corpus: best practices when creating a new CMC corpus.'
weight: 1
#icon: book
#icon_pack: fas

# Page metadata.
title: FAIR-ify
type: book  # Do not modify.
---
## Introduction

The last few years have brought forward a significant amount of language
corpora dedicated to computer-mediated communication (CMC). In Europe alone,
more than 30 CMC corpora can be identified and found via a simple web search,
for example through their listing in the [CLARIN CMC Resource
Family](https://www.clarin.eu/content/cmc-corpora).  This development is
evidence of a vibrant field of research as well as a general aim towards making
existing research resources known. A substantial number of these corpora claim
to become or stay available as research data resources for further exploration,
replication, or referencing.  However, whether research data can be made
available and reusable often depends not only on the willingness of the data
collector.  Especially in the domain of CMC data, a highly debated realm in
terms of privacy and data protection, targeted steps are needed to allow for
any kind of use or reuse of data for research or dissemination purposes,
including the retrieval of user consent, anonymisation, and high-quality
processing.  Apart from copyright issues and problematic terms of use/terms of
service of certain platforms (e.g. Twitter [strongly discourages redistribution
of Twitter content and suggests sharing IDs of Tweet, Direct Message, and Users
instead](https://developer.twitter.com/en/developer-terms/more-on-restricted-use-cases)),
other factors such as data formats, missing long-term preservation strategies,
(lack of) persistent identifiers, access protocols or lacking documentation may
prevent or at least hamper the dissemination and accessibility of CMC corpora.

## FAIR Guiding Principles

The FAIR Guiding Principles for Data Management and Stewardship, published by
[Wilkinson et al. (2016)]({{< relref "/publication/wilkinson-fair-2016" >}}), provide a
universal framework for data management based on the principles of Findability,
Accessibility,Interoperability and Reusability.  They have received
international support and have been incorporated into relevant funding schemes
like [Horizon
2020](https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/grants_manual/hi/oa_pilot/h2020-hi-oa-data-mgt_en.pdf).

## Best Practices for Creating CMC Corpora

First and foremost, it is advisable to think about how to handle the data
during and after a research project. In fact, many funding agencies already
require researchers to prepare a data management plan (DMP) at the project
proposal stage to formalise these thoughts, and even if it is not required, we
recommend it  as a reasonable first step. For preparing a DMP, good guidelines
already exist, for example from the [Digital Curation Centre in the
UK](https://dmponline.dcc.ac.uk/), and many research institutes and
universities have set up dedicated research data management offices to help
researchers.

Regarding the FAIR principles, we want to emphasise that both the Findability
and Accessibility principle can be realised by merely depositing the corpus in
a research data repository, for example, a [CLARIN
Centre](https://www.clarin.eu/content/clarin-centres), which communicates the
existence of the corpus to domain-relevant search engines, assigns a persistent
identifier and allows the download of the data that may be restricted in
access. It is also important to define a license for the corpus, which ideally
does not prevent reuse, and to display this license in a prominent position.
Most research data repositories prefer well known licenses, but also allow
user-defined ones, and enforce an explicit choice. 

Compared to Findability and Accessibility, the principles of Interoperability
and Reusability are not immediately solved by depositing the corpus in a
research data repository but are indeed specific to the community. First,
research data must be stored in open and well documented formats. Here, the CMC
community is responsible for developing and documenting common standard formats
for CMC data. One important step has already been taken with the [CMC core
extension to the TEI P5 Guidelines](/publications/beiswenger-cmc-core-2020/),
which was recently submitted to the TEI consortium as a feature request
and will hopefully be adopted by more corpora in the future. Secondly, research
data must have extensive metadata. In the case of CMC data, we consider it
particularly important to provide information about the data provenance, that
is, when the data were collected, what kind of data were collected and where it
came from (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, blogs). In short, these best practices can
be summed up by the following questions.

* Are my data findable through a search engine, for example, the
  [VLO](https://vlo.clarin.eu/), [OLAC](http://search.language-archives.org/)?
* Does the corpus have a Persistent Identifier?
* Is there a clear license attached (that ideally permits reuse)?
* Are the data stored in an open and well-documented format?
* Do the metadata describe the data correctly and comprehensively, also covering the provenance of it?

Our community is in the fortunate position that work has already been
undertaken and that the community as a whole, sees the need for and benefits of
common standards for data formats, and procedures for data documentation.  But
we still need further targeted work, where we continue to discuss issues
openly, keep formalising existing procedures and where we keep developing and
exchanging our know-how.

We wish and hope that this CLARIN K(nowledge)-Centre and this documentation
will help to bring our CMC corpora closer to the ideal of FAIR research data
management.


## References

{{< cite page="/publication/frey-et-al-2020-fair-index-cmc" view="4" >}}
